Passionate and unique, driven collector and Academy associate
Ray Bandar has collected skulls for more than 60 years.
His home is a natural history museum.
Throughout Ray's life, anytime has been a good time for collecting.
The honeymoon trip occurred in 1954.
It was a camping trip, 11 weeks of camping across the United States and Canada
in an old Ford convertible, a 1946 Ford. We ended up in Montreal and Quebec and New York and so on.
Coming back to the southwest, I saw the skeletal remains of a horse in Colorado.
I hopped a fence, got out, collected the skull, the pelvis, the limb bones, the vertebrae, packed it in the back.
And then from there on in, it was going out on weekends looking for road kills
and I made contact with the director of the zoo
and the vet, and so they'd contact me when animals had died
or they were going to euthanize an animal.
So, I got a nice, large collection of exotic animals from around the world from the local zoos.
Over the years, Ray has collected more than 7,000 skulls
including about 2,000 California sea lions
the largest museum collection of California sea lions in the world.
Each specimen provides another valuable data point
for the scientists who come from around the globe to use his collection.
Ray was employed by the California Academy of Sciences in the 1950s
and started a training program for students.
He then went on to teach high school biology,
anatomy and physiology for 32 years
but has continued to volunteer as an Academy Field Associate for more than half a century.
It takes a special kind of person to cut off animal heads for the sake of science.
Ray is probably one of the most important resources we have here at the Academy, at least for this department
because not only is he retired and has the time to walk the beach and collect these animals
it's what he absolutely loves to do.
So, it's going to be difficult to find anybody that A, has the time
and B, has this consuming passion, obsession, to be able to do this.
Because a lot of people won't be able to stomach it, a lot of people don't really understand
what goes on or why it's important.
So, why do you collect the skull and not the rest of the body?
Well, if I'm walking up and down the beach for miles, and there's the carcass of a sea lion
there's no way I can haul the carcass back.
It may take many hours to flesh out the meat and bring back the skeleton
which may take several trips.
And the skull is the easiest part to remove.
Now, the skull is like the pages in a book.
It can tell you a lot about the lifestyle of an animal,
whether the animal walked upright
was a knuckle-dragger, if it walked on all fours, whether the animal was prey or predator.
Most of the collecting that I do, especially marine mammals,
is under special federal and state permits.
And so, I've been under permit since the Marine Mammal Act of 1972.
One look at this enormous collection and people often wonder why we need so many skulls.
To use the analogy of a library, if you stop adding new books,
you stop adding new sources of information
and your body of knowledge stagnates over time.
The same is true for a museum collection. And Ray continues adding with a passion.
Our collection would not be what it is without Ray’s work.
He has really almost single-handedly built our marine mammal collection.
Ray's work is an ongoing labor of love.
Walking in soft sand for miles on the beach isn't the easiest thing
but I like the results.